---
layout: post
title:  "Double DQN"
subtitle: "Deep Reinforcement Learning with Double Q-learning"
date:   2018-11-14
background: '/img/posts/02.jpg'
mathjax: true

---

> @author: Ziyu Zhou



# Double Q-learning

Double Q-learning, proposed by Hado van Hasselt *et al* in their paper [Deep Reinforcement Learning with Double Q-learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/1509.06461), is to solve the overestimation problem of the Q-learning algorithm.



## DQN with target network

Let's first take a brief review on the deep Q-learning algorithm.

In the deep Q network (DQN), based on the Bellman optimality, the target is defined as 

 $$Y_t^{\text{DQN}} = R_{t+1} + \gamma \displaystyle\max_a Q( S_{t+1}, a; \theta_t )$$

where $\theta_t$ is the parameters of the network at time $t$.

To update the parameters, we take a stochastic gradient descent (SGD) step

$$\theta = \theta + \alpha \left(Y_t^{\text{DQN}} - Q(S_t, A_t; \theta )  \right) \nabla_{\theta} Q(S_t, A_t; \theta)$$

This assumes that the Q target $Y_t^{\text{DQN}}$ and the Q value $ Q(S_t, A_t; \theta)$ use the same parameters and are updated together. It will introduce high correlations between Q target and Q value which makes the training very unstable, meaning that at every step of training, the Q values shift but also the target value shifts.

To break this kind of correlation, Mnih *et al.* propose to use a separate target network whose parameters are copied every $\tau$ steps from the original Q value network and are kept fixed on all other steps.

The target network is now

$$Y_t^{\text{DQN}} = R_{t+1} + \gamma \displaystyle\max_a Q( S_{t+1}, a; \theta_t^{-} )$$

where $\theta_t^{-}$ represents the parameters of the target network.

At every $\tau$ steps, the paramters are updated as

$$\theta_t^-  \gets \theta_t$$



## Problem of DQN

The max operator in the target network

$$Y_t^{\text{DQN}} = R_{t+1} + \gamma \displaystyle\max_a Q( S_{t+1}, a; \theta_t^{-} )$$

uses the same parameters to select and evaluate the actions. The problem is that the best action for the next state is not necessarily the action with the highest Q value. As illustrated in Thomas Simonini's [blog](https://medium.freecodecamp.org/improvements-in-deep-q-learning-dueling-double-dqn-prioritized-experience-replay-and-fixed-58b130cc5682):

> At the beginning of the training we don’t have enough information about the best action to take. Therefore, taking the maximum Q value (which is noisy) as the best action to take can lead to false positives. If non-optimal actions are regularly given a higher Q value than the optimal best action, the learning will be complicated.



## Double DQN

Double DQN addresses the above problem by decoupling action selection and action evaluation:

- Use our Q value network, i.e., the original online network, to select what is the best action to take for the next state (the action with the highest Q value).
- Use our target network to calculate the target Q value of taking that action at the next state.

Now $Y_t$ becomes

$$Y_t^{\text{DoubleDQN}} = R_{t+1} + \gamma Q \left( S_{t+1}, \text{arg} \displaystyle\max_a Q(S_{t+1}, a; \theta_t); \theta_t^{-} \right)$$

The following table shows the difference between the target network $Y_t$ for DQN and Double DQN:

| Algorithm  | Target Network                                               |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| DQN        | $Y_t^{\text{DQN}} = R_{t+1} + \gamma Q \left( S_{t+1}, \text{arg} \displaystyle\max_a Q(S_{t+1}, a; \theta_t); \theta_t \right)$ |
| Double DQN | $Y_t^{\text{DoubleDQN}} = R_{t+1} + \gamma Q \left( S_{t+1}, \text{arg} \displaystyle\max_a Q(S_{t+1}, a; \theta_t); \theta_t^{-} \right)$ |



## References

1. Hado van Hasselt, Arthur Guez and David Silver. [Deep Reinforcement Learning with Double Q-learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/1509.06461)
2. Mnih *et al*. [Human Level Control Through Deep Reinforcement Learning](https://deepmind.com/research/publications/human-level-control-through-deep-reinforcement-learning/)
3. Thomas Simonini. [Improvements in Deep Q Learning: Dueling Double DQN, Prioritized Experience Replay, and fixed Q-targets](https://medium.freecodecamp.org/improvements-in-deep-q-learning-dueling-double-dqn-prioritized-experience-replay-and-fixed-58b130cc5682)

## 